Okay, we're with Walter.
Walter Biller.
Biller.
Spell your name for me.
B-I-L-L-E-R.
Do you use a little initial?
No.
Okay.
So we're in Walter's spectacular apartment.
What do you call it?
We call it a Haight flat.
Is that what it is?
It's a 1905 Edwardian Haight-Ashbury flat.
Oh, great.
And guess what?
There's books, man, all over the place.
Look at this.
I'm going to take a picture of you if you don't mind.
There's more books in here than I ever want to think about moving out of here.
Okay, cool.
So you're about to play for me a... This was a tape of World News on CNN.
I think it was last November.
I'm not exactly sure of the date.
But it was following the opening of the New York Times at the point we were able to start to get some major news.
Okay.
Okay, anytime.
And I'm just going to get the audio of this.
I'll put this close to the speaker.
And that's it.
The opening of the San Francisco Library this year was heralded as the coming of a new age for libraries.
But the new design has one group of book lovers on the rampage.
Here are the books.
There are atriums and there are spaces in the floor that go up five stories and there's nowhere for books.
It has 9.1 miles more shelf space than the old library.
It has more shelf space on the open floor proportionally than the old library did.
Is it enough shelf space?
Maybe not.
Definitely not, say critics, making way for the new that talks about the old, thousands of old books.
Library officials say they don't know for sure how many, but think it was around 20,000 from the old building.
A current New Yorker article called it the great book purge, claiming more than 100,000 rare and one-of-a-kind books for help to be dumped.
Local historian and library buff Walter Biller claims to have a computer list of thousands of books that were dumped, many irreplaceable.
I believe 19,000 of them were last copy, which is generally something that are, you know, books that are scrutinized before they discard it.
Library officials say the number was much smaller and admit maybe there were some volumes that should have been kept.
As people were preparing for the move, that those books weren't reviewed.
They weren't sent out for review.
It was a very, very brief period of time.
Library officials say 430,000 new books were added.
As charges and counter charges fly, three times as many visitors stream through the doors of the new library, an indication that some book lovers welcome the change.
It's a debate about the future of libraries and in many ways a debate about technology versus the old-fashioned version of the library.
Critics say computers belong in the library, but so do different treasures of the past.
I think the library in essence has become a showcase for high technology.
at great expense to the book collections and the print collections.
A debate about knowledge, the way it's kept, and the way it's tapped on.
Rusty Dornan, CNN, San Francisco.
The White House Gardens are famous for their spring area public.
If you're looking for a book, the library is a good place to go, but you might have trouble with the plush grand new San Francisco main library.
They've got a cost of $135 million.
It has come under attack for paying more attention to architecture than books.
An in-house survey leaks to the media made things look pretty bad.
Officials called that survey flawed, so we decided to see for ourselves.
I have a list of books, some classics, some popular fiction, some children, some obscure.
I wanted to check out just how many I could check out.
I was directed to the online computer directory.
The old card catalog is gone.
All right, let's start.
Let's start with the author.
First book.
Simpson O.J.
I want to tell you this is working.
Huh.
The search for an author has not located any titles in the database.
Let's see.
Plato.
L-A-T-O.
Oh, they have 46 Plato books.
Okay.
So it's not here.
And we have the trucks that are just going to be turned over there.
I'm not going to find it any.
I'm looking for a Flyland Drive by Mike McFintock.
It's in the children's section.
Here's your coffee for the right hand.
We got it.
Okay.
Great.
All right, J940.
I ended up getting four out of the ten books I was looking for.
That's about the results of a survey as flawed as it might have been.
So, what's the problem?
Lack of staffing, growing pains of moving into a new building, and mismanagement, given us some of the reasons.
At one time, there were 30,000 books waiting to be reshelled.
There's too much behind, though.
I would say that's a good one.
You know, the library has had a series of publicized problems.
This book availability is just one of them, but it is one of the reasons that Chief Librarian Ben Dallin is expected to lose his job this week.
Mike Sugarman, Channel 5, I'm News News.
The Chief Librarian could learn his status earlier tomorrow, and that's when the City's Library Commission meets in special sessions.
And remember, an additional... Mike Sugarman is a great radio reporter.
You can see his TV reports here on Channel 5 and hear him every day on KCBS Radio on News 7.
The next piece.
And I'm Pam Moore.
Thank you for staying up with us tonight.
A one-day strike by 7,500 nurses at Kaiser Hospitals in Northern California is just hours away tonight.
The nurses' union says it is frustrated over the lack of progress in negotiations.
So to let us know, let's go tonight with James Satori.
He is standing by live at Kaiser Medical Center in San Francisco.
There's a piece about a Kaiser strike.
That'll tell you when the date is.
I'm not sure.
James Hattori.
James, thank you for that report.
By the way, Kaiser and the nurses' union met last week with federal mediators
a year ago this week, San Francisco's state-of-the-art main public library opened its doors to an eager public.
Now, as Nightbeat's Claudia Collins reports, the library and its critics are at odds, at odds over what to do with miles of unshelled material.
Beneath the floors of San Francisco's multi-million dollar public library is another library you won't see.
Row after row of books and manuscripts, one-of-a-kind periodical collections, even card catalogs that, for now, sit inside the city's storage room at Brooks Hall.
Here is where you'll find the selected works of Mahatma Gandhi, the 18th century collection of Gentleman's Magazine, and countless other books that are in library window, waiting to be moved upstairs, digitized, or thrown away.
Acting Chief Librarian Roberto Estevez is among those determining which stay and which go.
A lot of the books that are there may be given away are those that we are going to be getting rid of because they're duplicates, they're old editions of preface books.
Should the public library be giving away or discarding any of the books in a storage room?
Critics say no, and they worry that volumes of San Francisco history will disappear forever.
These are some of the books that have been discarded from the library.
Historian Walter Miller says he's rescued many books, including rare ones in good condition.
He believes the ones he has and these in Brooks Hall will perish simply because there isn't enough space for them upstairs.
These books, a lot of them will be given away free to the public in sort of a parking lot sale approach to discards, and many of them will be given to other libraries, and many of them will probably go to the dump, like 200-some thousand books that we've done for last year.
The library says it's now going through all this material to make sure they know what's down here and don't give away anything valuable.
But it's unlikely the library will agree to weld the building solution.
Open Brooks Hall to the public as the newest floor of the city's new library.
In San Francisco, Claudia Cowen, New Center 4, on the night before.
Here it is, here it is, here it is.
But it may also be one of the most inefficient and expensive to run.
Just try to check out a book there.
Channel 7's neighbor John is in the newsroom tonight.
There's an exclusive report.
Maybe this is an absurd situation.
Well, Dan, it may only be a year old, but boy doesn't have problems.
Channel 7 News has learned that a newly completed audit shows library operations $700,000 in the red.
The fallacial library is an architectural showpiece.
but the red ink is just part of the trouble.
The more traditional has no place in this library.
The glass and chrome building is flooded with light.
Car catalogs serve as decorative pieces of art, and the cars that once inhabited them as creative wall covering.
And the computers with internet access are attracting people who have never used the library system before.
are more popular than the 49ers and the Giants combined.
Those crowds are one element straining this high-tech showpiece.
The hearings are rarely seen by patrons, but behind the scenes are grappling with mounds of foot, which were beeped often months ago.
And every time I say, we've known them.
And she may not be able to the next time.
With a looming debt, the library may remain severely short-staffed.
The hiring of a new head librarian may be delayed, and purchases of new books may be put on hold.
Although critics say there was never room for them in the first place.
No doubt the building feels spacious enough to accommodate the attendees of thousands of patrons that visit the library each week.
Yet librarians say actual shelf space for books is so tight here that according to one estimate, over a third of the circulating collection remains in storage.
Hundreds of thousands of books have already been given or thrown away.
and critics charged with so little show-speak, that trend will continue.
In general, the books stop the short end of the stick here.
That may be that no matter how troubled, San Francisco's Library of the Future may be giving younger patrons just that, the future.
I think it's a lot better than just books.
But still, the fact remains, library operations are deeply in debt, as we discover to the tune of $700,000.
Mayor Willie Brown has been briefed on the preliminary findings of the new audit, such as to attack the issue aggressively after he returns from his trip to Philadelphia next week.
Dan?
Pretty much.
When people started working, decided to leave the library, a strategy was put into place not to
hired new people to replace them so overtime was put into play and that's when the bills started adding up where the anchor cuts to the co-anchor and the co-anchor is anna chevez who is this very popular uh female co-anchor in the b area just retired and she just has this look on her face she just rolls her eyes she gave ten thousand dollars to the new libraries
Listen, instead of watching this stuff, I just can talk to you now.
Yeah, yeah.
I'll give you this and you can talk to me.
Okay, and you know, trust me with it.
Okay, well, let me just give you a quick five-minute run through.
Well, let's see.
We've got an hour here, so let's take, you know.
First of all, let me give you some material I have so I won't forget.
This is a list of some of the pertinent phone numbers.
Oh, good.
I thought this was a classic.
I didn't notice this until I called you.
This is a phone book, a packed old phone book with the library on the cover.
I never noticed that.
I've been looking at that for a year.
I could take these things, right?
Yeah, this is all going to go with you.
And I thought that this was really important to me throughout this whole thing.
This is the last scene out of The Skin of Our Teeth where Thornton Wilder says,
Yes, remember.
Remember, Maggie, we almost lost them once before.
He's talking about the books.
This is act three after the war.
And when we finally did collect a few touring copies out of old cellars, they ran in everyone's head like a fever.
They as good as rebuilt the world.
Oh, I've never forgotten for long at a time that living a struggle.
I know that every good and excellent thing in the world stands moment by moment on the razor edge of danger and must be fought for, whether it's a field or a home or a country.
Oh, I'm jumping ahead.
There's goosebumps here.
Yeah.
The kind of stuff I look for, by the way.
I thought you liked that.
That's Thornton Wilder, Skate of Artie.
Second most produced play.
Why was he talking about books, Wilder?
It's an amazing play.
The first act is... This is so good, man.
This was 1943 when the United States was losing the war.
And this was... Act one is after the flood...
Act I is after the Ice Age, Act II is after the flood, and Act III is after the war.
It's just this cycling thing.
It was 1943.
We were losing the war.
I have a book of all Archibald MacLeish's books.
public speeches on the books saving the books during the war and what the library can do for the war yeah yeah and then and of course the war led to the uh national archives project which is i mean we were talking about digitalization right but that you know i don't i don't know that any project will ever surpass uh well somewhere between the wpa and the national archives when they put the censor
on microfilm.
I mean, the microfilming they did was astonishing.
What's the name of the project again?
Well, that would have been the National Archives.
There was a name for the project.
This would have been right after the war.
It started before the war.
Who learned to check it?
Well, when it started out, it was a Roosevelt project.
It started out under the WPA.
And what were they microfilming?
They microfilmed all the United States Census.
all these handwritten door-to-door sentences going back.
That's what computers would be good for.
1870s.
That would be good stuff to scan, don't you think?
Yeah, terrific stuff.
And particularly with the microfilm, it's easy because it's already been put in a machine-readable form.
But it's all handwritten, you know.
I'm going down to the L.C.
again in a couple weeks.
The National Archives out here, the big one, you know, the
The U.S.
Census Bureau is out in San Bruno.
It's the main one for that.
Everything's there.
Yeah.
That's a very interesting issue.
Well, I do a lot of census work.
I mean, should all that archival stuff be kept, I wonder?
Well, the census is, I mean, as an architectural or any kind of genealogy and historical tool, it's just vital.
The answer is yes, probably.
It has everybody, who they are, where they lived, and what they did for a living.
There are people who are going to tell you, though, that it's the information that matters there, not the piece of paper.
And I wonder... Well, the paper's gone.
The paper is gone.
At that point in time, they put a lot of newspapers on microfilm and put all these sensors, and they tended to throw out... Well, great.
This is interesting to me.
You know, I know... How do you know of it?
How do you know of it?
I know of it because I swim in it all the time, you know, when I do history work.
But there are books.
I know the National Archives has put together some books of how they did what they did, but I've seen pictures of rooms the size of a football field with technicians working on microfilm machines.
It's massive.
It started with the WPA.
They started documenting the material.
Oh, I have to show you that.
I'm going to see Nick in a couple hours.
They get an inventory of the archives of San Francisco.
Remember now, this is an archive.
They went through every library and city hall and every municipal building and they indexed everything, every archival record that they had.
About three years, they had about 250 people working on it, and then they paid each agency to cooperate.
This is from the library?
That's something I picked up.
I'm a book collector.
This project here alone is just, it'll never happen again.
And they did thousands.
They did every city in the United States.
It's astonishing.
What do you do pre-computer?
What do you do for a living, Walter?
I'm a student right now.
I'm a pre-law student at City College.
Here in San Francisco.
And I came out here in 1987 from Washington, D.C.
I grew up in Washington and Arlington.
And I got out of high school in 1980, I believe it was, I started working for the Smithsonian.
And I was an audiovisual technician.
And then I also spent a year at the National Air and Space Museum as an exhibit technician.
And so I did a lot, but it was all history and, you know, that kind of thing.
Plus I grew up, I grew up with history.
I told you on the phone, you know, my grandfather started a tree business in Arlington County in 1919.
And between him and his father, they restored Mount Vernon's trees and they restored the White House trees for Jack Yonathus.
And so it's history and trees and preservation and books that come up in forever.
So I'm not doing anything I don't normally do.
And as far as making a living goes, I'm a carpenter when I need to make money.
So I can do that if I have to.
I try to work as little as possible, of course.
And you indicated that you're married.
I'm married.
Oh, yes, she works.
Your wife works.
My wife works.
And right now, I'm in hot to my ears to the U.S.
government.
But it'll all work out.
My wife, when I was doing general madness,
God bless the wives who support your dreams.
She really does.
She supports me and talks completely.
She's a coal miner's daughter from Pennsylvania.
You have to have that moral.
support, not just the passive support.
Yeah, no, you're exactly right.
They have to totally believe what you're doing.
I'm sure, particularly, I mean, I'm not the one to talk here, I think.
We are still in debt.
I mean, my book's been well, but I haven't come close to it.
I'll probably die all in one year.
Flushing out.
Yeah, yeah.
Is it worth it?
You bet.
Yeah, it's worth it.
What else are you going to do?
That's right, exactly.
It's nearly as exciting.
I'm doing it again now.
This is hot, what you're working on now.
I have an exquisite sense of getting into that story.
This is leading-edge stuff.
You're ten years ahead of your time.
Well, I think so.
This is going to be the book for... Just as Gentle Madness has been declared the book on book collecting for our generation.
It has been.
I can't wait to read it.
You know how a book club does.
I never get trying to read books.
Well, I'll try to do it.
I promise I'll send you one when I send the tape back.
Oh, I need some new ones.
Do you have a paperback?
No, the beauty of my book is it's not in paperback.
They only did it in... Well, it's going to come out in two years when the new book comes out.
But it still sells in hardcover.
Uh-huh.
You know, I'm smiling.
No, I was impressed when you told me you saw many cops.
I don't just feel good for you, I feel good for my cause.
Newsreaders and I have a much bigger constituency now than I ever did then, because I write a monthly column for this magazine called Good Wheel, which is worldwide.
Oh, I know that.
Well, I'm a regular, I'm in there every month.
Oh, okay.
And it may even be that I'll do a
Well, I don't want to do that.
You can do that, yeah.
But let's talk, let's do their timing.
We may have to get together again.
That's okay.
At least we'll give you a crash course.
So when the new library opened, we met up at a... Now, how did you get into this?
Well, the first, I would say that there's no doubt that the flashpoint for the revolt... Would you bring that to the recorder?
I was aware that there were serious problems at the library before the old library closed.
You know, I can't talk enough.
I couldn't talk.
I take all your time talking about the old library.
It was definitely overcrowded.
It definitely needed to be
to be retrofitted, but in 1989, before the earthquake, you could walk into the stacks.
They have seven stories of stacks made of Carnegie steel, and you could go in there and you could just get lost.
It was like... A nice, solid Carnegie library.
It was incredible.
It had two sets of stacks.
two sets of stacks that I believe would have worked out to about 25 linear miles of shelf space.
And how did you determine them?
We actually measured the shelves, Nick Baker and myself and two anonymous librarians.
It was alleged that your figures were wrong.
They were.
Actually, what happened is I didn't actually have anything to do with the numbers.
I actually showed up to take pictures of the card catalog, and then it turned out into a shelf counting episode.
So, and then I couldn't leave.
That was the thing.
We were locked in, just abandoned the library, you know, and couldn't leave.
So I, you know, jumped in, helped measure, but then the numbers, the numbers, one of the librarians made a serious mistake on the spreadsheet, and the numbers came out high, and then we reported them right away.
So what are the final limits?
Well, that happened on Thursday, and we came out in the paper, so there were 49 miles, which is a good number for San Francisco, being 49ers.
And then the Saturday paper reported that the library disputed our figures and said there were 30.6 miles in the old library, which was nine miles more than they had claimed three days earlier.
And then on the, I think it was the Tuesday paper, Kathy Page, the acting librarian, came out and admitted that the new main library was too small to hold its collection.
And that was the point of the whole exercise.
Okay, and then what is the... We called that the grand mea culpa, you know.
The grand mea culpa.
Okay.
I cop.
You know, they finally copped the fact that the new main was too small to hold the collection.
Well, how many... Up to that point, they were saying that there were miles of empty shelves in the new main.
So, how many miles of shelves do they have in the new main?
No one's ever measured.
I would like very much to... So, we should ask Gina if it's a long way.
The numbers that they claim and the numbers that are really in there aren't the same.
I know that, and unless they go and they do a legitimate count of the shelf, the footage, the linear footage of the shelves, it's all just numbers from... I'm quoting Stephen Coulter, and he says Walter Villa and people of his book.
Yeah, yeah.
You have been fingered as a troublemaker, as a left-winger, as a gaslight, as a perpetual...
Pretty much I've heard all this before.
And he's saying it on the record to a writer who's with a national, I mean, he's going, you know, I said, he's calling the women, you know, the eight white women.
And I said, you know, I've heard that expression.
He called them the ten pot-stirring white women.
Yeah, and I said, I mean, do you want to modify that?
He said, no, I don't.
I stand by it.
Yeah, he's a can-do guy.
I said, so you're saying that these women are racists.
And he said, absolutely.
and they're against gays.
I said, how so?
You know, they don't reach out.
Well, I kind of want to paraphrase it.
Yeah, yeah.
Well, that to me, what's a librarian supposed to do?
I mean, a librarian is supposed to explain, understand, maintain a collection and develop it and make it available and help you get the things you want.
Public service.
You know, your job is not community relations to go out and say,
well the affinity the affinity center steven culture created the affinity centers to get the money that they because they didn't have enough money and they wanted to and they and then also the affinity centers and those people are going to be real upset when eventually this the truth comes out if it ever does um were basically a smoke screen for the corporations that were going in the corporations got
got major, you know, what do they call it, naming opportunity out of the New Main, but really didn't make the kinds of contributions that the individuals that gave to the Affinity Centers did.
You go in the Affinity Centers and you'll find these beautiful little rooms that have a handful of books in them and no staffers, no librarians.
So really what you've done is you've made more of the collection inaccessible.
Well, that's right.
Well, I said to him, again, I'm coming in from the East Coast,
And I said, you know, the idea of an affinity group, whatever you want to call it, if you're going to do a gay lesbian thing, hey, that's cool, but how much money did you put aside for collection development?
Did you target any collections that you wanted?
Did you hire a full-time researcher and a curator?
Right.
None of that happened.
And, you know, so you've got a gay, lesbian room, great, but what if they're very pretty, but can they fight?
Remember that line in the dirty desert?
Exactly, exactly.
What have you got here?
What have you got here to attract an international scholar to come along and do some work?
Like my lawyer, he says, whatever.
The thing about the affinity setters that I found kind of laughable is that there's no women's affinity setter, which I found it interesting that nobody felt that the women weren't worth approaching.
And there's no Jewish affinities that are, which I thought was pretty funny because my friend Arthur Carlson turns to me and he says, what, we don't have the money?
You know, I just fell out.
You know, I mean, you know, in New York, it would be an outrage.
San Francisco's never had a real, a real big Jewish constituency, you know, but in New York, I mean, it was Italian.
It used to be.
No, no Italian.
No Caucasian males.
If you're a white woman, you're out.
So I guess if you're a white woman at Podstor, you really don't have much there.
yeah but but actually most of those white women pot stirrers and i fully qualify as one and i you know i take i i wear that badge with pride which badge you wear a white woman pot stirr white woman yeah well he said we're all of the all of the of the the dissident for white women pot stirrers so uh i i you know i'm proud to say i am one of those okay so uh walter how did this group get together
That's okay.
You mentioned the word sell.
It's almost like your political action movement.
Oh, yeah.
I'll give you a quick flowchart on that.
It started out, first of all, I knew there were problems at the old library, and that's a whole story in itself, but I'll cut to the new Maine opening.
The new Maine opened, first of all, the old Maine was closed for five months, which was frustrating.
and made me worry a lot about what was going on with the move.
But then the new main opened on April 18, 1996, the anniversary of the 1906 earthquake, which is pretty ironic.
From the ashes.
Yeah, right, right.
Actually, exactly where the old city hall was, you know, that collapsed in the 1906 earthquake.
It had taken 25 years to build it, and when it collapsed, they found
that there was no structural, I mean, it was a big old, you know, scam that had been going on for a decade, a couple decades.
So, I mean, that lot has a history.
There's a buried river under there called the Hayes River.
H-A-Y-E-S.
H-E-Y-E-S, yeah, and which is actually seeping into the walls of Brooks Hall now, which is a problem.
They didn't know that when they went to build it?
Oh, they knew it was there.
I've heard people say they didn't know it was there.
They actually pumped the river.
around the site when they dug the hole.
Yeah, I just thought it was certainly a bad thing.
I mean, the French built their huge blinds.
Yeah, I called it the biblio-fuck-frances, but I haven't seen it for myself.
But I have read a great spoof.
It's in here somewhere.
Someone wrote a spoof of that.
It's hilarious.
It's in this pile here somewhere.
Someone did an elaborate speech.
What am I going to take here, by the way?
Well, I'll let you decide.
Let me tell you what happened with the opening.
There was the opening on June 6th.
No, May 30th.
Excuse me.
May 30th, Nicholson Baker and Gray Brecon spoke at the Coret Auditorium in the New Library at a speech called The Destruction of Knowledge.
This is the defining moment.
It was the flashpoint for the revolt.
At that point, there were about 200 people there, maybe, and a lot of the real hardcore historian types that I knew were there, the younger historians particularly, and Gray spoke in essence about the whole concept of
When you get one God, you've got to get rid of the old God so that you can't have two.
You can't serve two masters.
Exactly.
And he spoke, of course, about the Library of Alexandria and these sorts of things.
And he took it all up to the present.
And then Nick Baker did his kind of a stand-up version of his New Yorker piece.
A little more bite.
Much more bite.
I read the text of both.
I have both.
That's great.
You have the original speech.
And he read that word for word.
He said exactly... And people were just... I mean, the script can't capture the kind of tension and anger and concern that was in the room.
You could cut it with a knife.
So you think it's almost like Mark Anthony's funeral nation?
I wasn't there, but I imagine it was kind of like, let's do it for the Gipper, at least.
I've seen that one.
And I went over to a friend's house that night, a historian friend, and got drunk, which is something I don't do all that often.
Sat down with a bottle of whiskey and drank it.
I mean, the world was coming to an end.
Why is the world coming through?
Well, because, I mean, we realized, first of all, the old library was something that we all just loved more than anything.
So you're passionate about books and libraries?
More than passionate.
You know, just live for them.
And the thing is, is that it wasn't just that they had trashed a lot of books.
It was the way they had done it and the reasons they had done it.
I think that that was really the thing, is that when you realize that this could go on everywhere, I mean, if we didn't stop this here in San Francisco, this was going to burn throughout the whole United States.
Just talk, remove that, would you move that bottle just so it's not there?
And, uh, I want to get this with that San Francisco Bay Area.
Yeah, there you go.
Didn't even set that prop up.
Just keep talking.
Uh-huh.
So, um, so we, uh,
So then that night, some people had connected.
And I mean, the stage after the show, everybody came up on the stage, and there were about 150, 100 people on the stage talking and saying, what are we going to do about this?
And the union guild, the people who had organized that evening, at the next commission meeting where, well, actually, Baker said, everybody come to the next commission meeting.
It's Tuesday night.
It must have been about a week later.
And I went to that library commission meeting.
And I spoke in defense at the card catalog, which was the initial issue.
They wanted to destroy the card catalog.
This was, you know, in Dallin's days.
And I got very involved in that, and then that led to another thing, led to another thing, led to another thing.
Eventually, we had a list of about, you know, about 100 issues, primary issues.
It was very complex.
You had to sort of prioritize.
there was a meeting that was put together out in Berkeley at Melissa Riley's house.
And I imagine by the time your book comes out, this won't need to be a secret, but it's kind of, it was kind of an issue because she does work for SFPL.
And, um, and that's where I would say it began.
And, and that night after the meeting, we went out, uh, everybody left and I was sitting out on the front stoop with Melissa having a beer.
And, uh,
with Melissa and with Andrea Grimes, and everybody else had gone, all 30 or 40 people that showed up.
And we decided that we needed a name for this group.
We needed to have a name, and we looked up the street sign, and since it was a corner of Edith and Cedar in Berkeley, we decided Edith Cedar Group was a good name.
And it sounded like a librarian, and we knew we had to be anonymous.
I mean, you know, there was just too many of us that were librarians.
I won't, I'll just, because I'm not going to.
I think that's kind of out of the bag now, actually.
I've heard it twice.
Yeah, and it got into a newspaper article by mistake one time.
Oh, you did talk to Dicha.
Great.
Did you see her books?
No.
She's got problems getting in her garage or something like that.
She was a little nervous.
Yeah, yeah.
I think you probably have rarer books than she does.
She didn't understand the concept of the last copy.
She was talking about the last copy in the San Francisco system.
It's actually the last copy concept for America.
Right.
Which is what I thought she was talking about.
Yeah, no, she would mean for the SFPL.
So that was kind of a disappointment for me.
I was kind of hoping it would be 8%.
But that's, you know, that's a small event.
Yeah.
Well, anyway, this, that meeting, actually, at that meeting, a whole bunch of, the whole, there was a whole, what are we going to do about this?
You know, and there were so many issues, and I don't want to use the word agenda, that everybody had an issue they were particularly interested in.
or particularly angry about them, and everybody kind of went like that, you know, into these different issues, and there was another Edith Cedar meeting, and then I remember that I started falling out with the original Edith Cedar group pretty early on, realizing that I was much more of a hardliner than some of these people were.
They wanted to negotiate with the library, with Dallin, and
and people down there, administrators, and I knew that that was not going to happen, and as a matter of fact, I remember my rallying cry was, hey guys, wake up and smell the corporate napalm, you know.
You're a little, you are definitely, you're political here.
Yeah, and so my little group that came out of it, and it took a few months for this to develop, we called ourselves the Library of
The Library War Council, for lack of a better name.
Consisting of who besides yourself?
That would have primarily been the Three Musketeers, me, Kerwin, and Gillespie.
And then, of course, we were getting a lot of mainline information from some of the librarians, like Andrea and so forth.
But that was the main group.
And then there were others in that group, too.
Aditya came in a little bit on that.
But primarily, I would say it was the Three Musketeers, because we were the ones that were motivating and then following up on the media.
And Gillespie, who I haven't talked to.
You really should talk to him.
I asked him, I said, do you want to talk to Nick?
And he said, I will talk to Nick if Nick wants to talk about how we did the media, how we did what we did, how we made this thing a national story.
I said, that's what I can talk to him about.
He said, otherwise, he says, you know, I'm just a flack.
What does he do?
He works for a corporation.
He's like an office director.
He's like a publicist, administrator type person, and then he runs a thing, primarily, his main thing is a public access project.
He takes on causes that were... How many people would get to see him?
Maybe I could do a telephone number.
He's a telephone guy.
So, what's the phone number?
It's on the list I gave you.
He's a telephone guy.
He's an interesting character.
I'll give you a sense of how much respect and how good he is, Kerwin and I call him Media God.
Media God, yeah.
Everybody in this thing, it sort of developed this medieval, you know, everything had a name.
You know, you had to keep it fun, you know.
Was there a possibility that, you know, like they say in the stories they must have mentioned it,
kicking your eye off the ball.
It didn't become one of these things that develops an energy of its own.
No, it's a bureaucracy that becomes self-sustaining.
No, not at all.
As a matter of fact, that was one of the reasons that Edith Cedar Group and the little cell I was involved with broke apart because Edith Cedar was like really getting into some bureaucracy.
And our thing, we had a list of people that we wanted out of our public library.
That was it.
I mean, we had to start by removing some of these people because they were a complete obstacle to change.
They were lying to the media.
They were taking money.
They were hiring people.
It was just a runaway train.
So we knew our first thing we had to do was get rid of some of the players, and that's what we did.
So you made a hit list.
We made a hit list.
Dallin being number one.
Dallin was number one.
Got him.
Kathy Page was number two.
Finally got her.
Pretty much got her.
David Price was number three.
David Price was who?
He was Ken Dallin's accountant.
The books guy, the money.
We got rid of him.
Is this pretty much the prioritization?
Yeah, we went right down the list.
It was a punch list.
Price was third on the punch list?
Price was third.
No, Coulter was lower down the list because Coulter was on the outside, and we needed to get the people on the inside first.
Coulter's probably number one now.
Coulter is it.
It's his turn.
Since I've arrived, there's a watcher poster.
Yeah, I got one there for you.
That's good.
I'm glad to know that.
And I was going to ask him about it.
Not necessary.
He said, look at this.
Yeah.
And I went, ooh.
And I started reading some of these things into the tape report.
You know, the report is taken.
Uh-huh.
That's pretty cool.
Now I asked him to respond to something he showed me.
Uh-huh.
Yeah, it's sort of like he opened the door, as they say.
Totally.
Yeah, but the guy's also coated in Teflon, I have to tell you.
No, he's slick.
I call him my favorite Nevada Sharpie.
Well, we'll see.
Well, he's not going tothere's already heat at City Hall.
The problem with the books not getting back on the shelves is the librarians exactly sabotage as an effort, I'll tell you what he said,
to build their base and to not allow volunteers to work and do what they want to protect food and cemetery, that would be suggested.
Yeah, yeah, I've heard all that before.
So this has been articulated.
Oh, yeah.
This is really a labor thing, protect my job type of thing.
Well, you know, there's always going to be some of that going on when you have a union involved, and I'll be the first to admit.
Sure, and that perception is going to be there.
Oh, particularly, this was, you know, pre-UPS strike, so, you know, at that point, I'd say union popularity was at its all-time low.
Yeah, it's coming back.
I noticed even here with this BART thing, the people were dealing with it, yeah.
Yeah, they're not condemning the union.
No, and matter of fact, that almost happened last year.
These people worked a whole other year without a contract, so they didn't.
they went back yeah yeah you got a car right you're flying on an airplane uh so so i think that you know i mean the union has an agenda i mean that's just realistic uh but it isn't it isn't what stephen culture says it is so you had a punch list culture would be about fourth culture was fourth on the list you got two out of the four is price still there no he's gone
So you got three out of four.
Got three out of four so far, and we got Coulter on the ropes.
I don't think he knows it.
And you truly believe that it is three records to have been gone.
I know.
It's not just our people, but it's also the librarians.
They had a lot to do with it.
And why the accountant?
That's a whole story.
There's an article in here about him.
He's the guy that, basically, Dallin brought him in to break the union.
and uh and uh by by a downside because he him and dowlin were playing were playing games with the money and that's where they came up with the story that there wasn't enough money for labor there was there was too much labor at the library can we take a fast break oh yeah i have to i have to go water and the coffee yeah get off there yeah big houses so so then we uh okay so this is uh about the time that we made that list uh
And at that first meeting in, you know, 96, June, July, August, in that period, we put together this little brochure.
I don't know if you've seen that.
Nope.
That's the first piece of compiled problems.
It's the first list.
And there's about five or six things on there.
And there, you know, Brooks Hall and, you know, some problems that have been fessed up to now.
So I think...
Except for Brooks Hall, which is still an open question.
Basically, that pamphlet was kind of a worksheet for what we had to accomplish.
We had to promote these things and then make the change.
One of the reasons that we were really focused on Dallin and Paige, particularly Paige, and this is why she was number two on the list and somebody like Coulter wasn't, was because we were losing books.
And, you know, there was this whole business of, look, let's stop the hemorrhaging, you know.
Because we can always go back and do the political work later, but let's stop the hemorrhaging of the collections, because that's going away.
That's real.
Everything else is just so much bullshit.
Did you ever consider yourself a political person?
I mean, I've always been involved in these kinds of things, but nothing like this.
perfectly appropriate to what seems to be in the San Francisco.
Yeah, well, I'm from D.C.
You know, I don't know.
I grew up with the Washington Post, and I hung out with people like Josh Broder, you know, Broder's kid, you know.
And I've been in some landlord-tenant things, but I've never been anything like this.
I don't think any of us ever have.
I mean, where would you place yourself?
Except for maybe Kerwin.
Kerwin.
Kerwin, definitely.
He's a hard core.
Yeah, yeah.
He's a trip.
Oh, it's psychedelic stuff on the wall.
That's a house you have to visit.
He's a trip.
Yeah, right.
No, I love Kerwood.
And Gillespie, he's a politico, you know.
I mean, he's been doing his stuff.
But I don't know, you know, I don't even know if Gillespie had this kind of thing.
Realistically, I asked if the librarians did.
You know, all right, we've got a situation here.
Yeah, and I've also heard the idea of, you know, let's take back over the Asian Art Museum.
It ain't gonna happen.
So, what for you was a realistic thing?
To put Brooks Hall together as a working research library.
So make that a permanent part of the life.
Yeah, put in the basic environmental controls and put in a staircase and an elevator and run with it.
You know, we have, hey, you know, we're lucky that damn thing's there.
That's all I can say.
Only in San Francisco would something like that be there.
You know, I mean, that's... It's like finding Hitler's bunker.
I swear.
I swear the goddamn thing existed.
I know.
It's an unbelievable thing.
And the thing is, is that what's so interesting is that that's where the Macintosh was rolled out, down there in Brooks Hall.
That was used for computer trade shows back in the late 70s.
So it's like Nick Baker said in his speech.
He says, you know, Brooks Hall, where in prehistoric days they held computer conventions.
You know, that's where the Macintosh was rolled out.
So, I mean, there's quite a history there.
This is all, you know, Moscone Center is, that little Brooks Hall down there used to be, you know, that's what they used before Moscone opened.
I can see it somewhere, by the way.
Moscone Center?
No.
Oh, Brooks Hall.
Yeah, I bet.
I've yet to see Brooks Hall.
Oh, I've demanded it.
I'm banned.
For now.
I don't have an agenda.
I'm seeing Ken Dowlin, by the way.
Yeah, that's amazing.
He still lives here, up there, yeah.
Laguna where Chile is is down here, right?
I think so, yeah.
I can look it up now.
No, I walked past it on the way over it.
Well, Laguna goes all the way to the marina.
He's at the 1200 block, and I saw 900 when I came back.
That's right over here, though.
Yeah, so it's close.
Yeah.
I'm going to be here at 4 o'clock to sit.
Coulter lives right down here, too.
He lives down at Castro, right off of, well, actually, yeah, to visit there, 22 divisions.
Does he live lavishly?
I don't know that he lives lavishly.
I know he owns over $300,000 in Pactol stock, according to the Ethics Commission.
Yeah, well, he wrote, and it's signed by his name in his hands.
You know, that's the thing.
San Francisco's gotten to the point where illegal conflicts like that have become so run-of-the-mill that, you know, it's just not a shock to anybody.
What Coulter's doing is illegal under California state law.
The law of California says not only, he says, Coulter, you know, owning stock in a company that's got a million-dollar contract with a library,
that not only is he, you know, can he not recuse himself on votes having to do with technology contracts, it's illegal for him to even be on the commission.
He does have a million dollar contract with the library.
Well, PAC Bill's phone bill last year was $890,000.
Is that documentation on this?
It's somewhere in here, yeah.
It's all in here.
You're going to, this is a regular fortune on here.
But this year it will be well over that because they've added over 100 terminals, and that was only a partial year because it had only opened in April.
So this year... Where are we going to get that?
That's going to be a hard one.
Regina Menoosiery, maybe?
Might be worth a crap.
I'd love a photocopy of a million-dollar phone bill.
That's a hell of a lot of phone calls.
Of course, it's because of, you know...
A lot of it's the internet stuff.
I don't know if I want to ask her that just yet more.
Yeah, yeah.
It may be that Kathy Bremer or James Chafee.
Have you talked to Chafee?
I'm trying to leave a message.
You're supposed to be a 5 o'clock guy.
He's hard, yeah.
Until he said she's got to make it four.
So I left two messages in.
Please call so we can reschedule.
He's kind of camera shy, but once you start talking to him, it won't be a problem.
I hope the hell he gets his messages, because I'm not going to be able to meet him tonight if I... Yeah, yeah.
He's been at this 20 years.
He's the historian of this thing.
This goes back.
Then I did Cassandra.
I thought I'd just nail you with this while we were here this first time, because this is still ongoing.
This is where I downloaded using the computers, OPAC, using their, what is it called, PAC-2 system, not their DRA system.
And my Mac, I downloaded for 300 hours because it's a... What did you do?
I scrolled out.
300 hours of data from their database, yeah.
Real-time 300 hours?
Real-time 300 hours is the most grueling thing I ever went through, because we wanted to prove that they didn't have as many folks as they said they did.
Yeah, we came up, they claim that there are between 2.1 and 2.5 million, depending on who you ask and what week, in the system this is now.
This is the whole system.
And I came up with about, my first go-round, I came up with 900,000, which is, you know, pretty troubling.
Of course, now bear in mind, that doesn't mean a book is or isn't in the library.
It just means it isn't on OPAC.
But I just, so then I revised the figures a little later when I found out I missed some data.
I missed about 30% of the data, so the numbers actually wants to sit at about 1.3, 1.2, somewhere in there.
Still a million shy.
Still a million shy, which is good enough for government work.
Did you present these numbers to them?
Yeah, I did this report.
Did they respond to it?
No.
As a matter of fact, I kept waiting and waiting and waiting.
Here's the actual worksheet on it.
And this is the Chronicle featured it on the front page of the Bay Area section.
They gave me a ton of stuff that I haven't said.
That story should probably be in there, right?
Oh, I would think.
Is this for me to take?
That's for you.
Actually, there's backing files in here on that and everything.
That's quite an interesting project.
So then I had these huge files.
See, it's because the way that system works, their modems are only like 2,400 bought.
So, I mean, it just, I would, and plus the thing clicks you off after an hour.
So I had to devise the system.
I know many more than that, because some of these files are so big, but you get into the later years, like 1990s, and you're dealing with like 10,000 titles, and this is capturing each item of each title.
Sometimes it would take... You got all that data?
Yeah.
Where is it now?
It's sitting on my hard drive.
Yeah, I have... Have you got every title or every one?
Of the ones I downloaded, yeah.
I never went back and... I mean, it's unfortunately... Who's supposed to... Who should... Then I gave this data to Kasim, and Kasim crunched the data on a Unix supercomputer.
So all that's in there.
You'll be able to figure it all out from what's in there.
You're welcome to that.
I'm done with that project.
The report was prepared by the Allman, I guess, after the school publisher of local... That's my newsletter.
My chronicle writing life as they see it.
That's true.
You know, I think they met well.
And that is what led to the administration starting to tell people it's a flawed study.
And that's why Mike Sugarman went and did that piece.
And he, of course, found four out of ten books that by all rights should have been in the library, which is actually a little lower number than what Mike Cassandra would have shown.
So, you know, the flood.
And then there was another study, too.
There was a thing called a fill rate study that was done right about the same time.
You did that, too.
I didn't do that.
That's done by the California Library.
How much time have you put into this?
Has it?
Basically, it has occupied your life.
Yeah, pretty much.
What does your wife say about this?
Well, I'm able to do everything else, too.
I just work really fast.
I get up early and work fast.
I've been in school, and I've got a 4.0 average, so I've kept to the main task.
What do you expect to do?
I've kind of put history on the back burner this year.
And where are you in terms of finishing law school?
Oh, well, I still have to get my BA.
I haven't even got my BA, but I'll be, by 2001,
That's what he thought of me.
38.
So you'll be starting in the year of your 40s.
Yeah, second career.
And the first career having been?
I guess I've been a historian and a preservationist.
To me, my life working has always been something that I did to make money.
And everything else I did was what people know me for and what I actually do.
Like, for instance, these books, this is all San Francisco history, and this is almost all San Francisco history.
Now, how about books?
Did you have any books from the library here?
I have a little shelf full up there that are discards.
Those over there?
Yeah, I mean, you know, it's the same kind of stuff you might have seen at teaches, but I didn't see any of teaches.
Oh, okay.
I mean, she's got a garage full of stuff.
Let me just take a picture of you.
Let me get you with you in there.
Yeah, it's just a shelf right here.
You know, I didn't want to get into that.
On TV, they say I have a lot of books.
You know, you heard me say I had a lot of books.
They did, yeah.
And some very real ones, they said, too.
Yeah, and that's true, but I don't have a lot of books, but I do have some rare ones.
But those are all books.
This one here is particularly... That book, Gladiola Garden, was written in Washington, D.C.
in 1943 by Effie Lee Newsome, who is a black
woman artist and illustrator.
And they don't even have that in DC public.
That was the last copy here.
That's a self-published book.
There's probably only 500 of them in the world.
It's a wonderful book.
Well, we should probably get the bibliographical stuff on that.
So why don't you sit there?
Well, this is Grand Central.
I got it here.
I'll do you a favor.
I set this up.
I was going to show you that OPAC, but we don't have time to do that.
You pretty much know.
We might have to get together, you and I towards the... No, that'd be fine.
Again.
This is the San Francisco... I'll give you a quickie on this little thing right here.
We call this the FTG Forest ripoff guy.
This is Dallin's logo for the library.
He got rid of the old logo that the library had.
This is kind of old and traditional.
I didn't like it that much anyway, but then he got this.
Then he came up with a slogan, and this kicks me in the butt, access, discover, and power.
I can go on and on about subject and object, but access is, the last I checked, anyway, access is a noun.
That is really a very bizarre drawing.
Access is a noun.
This is the most illiterate.
Can you check that out?
Oh, sure.
Yeah.
I mean, you know, I looked at that the other, actually, my friend Andrew, who's British,
calls you up one day and he says, hey, I never saw that library store.
He goes, first of all, access is a noun, damn it.
And he says, who's accessing and who's empowering?
You don't empower yourself.
You empower somebody else.
The subject's all screwed up.
And I said, well, hey.
Well, I can get this, too, right?
Oh, it's on everything.
Yeah, but I can log into this.
This is their website?
Yeah.
But print it out, if you don't mind.
Actually, let me...
Let me put the location in there, too.
Yeah.
Hopefully it'll show the location.
There it is, sfl.lid.
Yes.